Project Gutenberg's A Street Of Paris And Its Inhabitant, by Honore De Balzac
#108 in our series by Honore De Balzac

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: A Street Of Paris And Its Inhabitant

Author: Honore De Balzac

Release Date: May, 2005 [EBook #8150]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on June 20, 2003]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A STREET OF PARIS ***




Produced by Dagny, John Bickers and David Widger





                          A STREET OF PARIS

                                 AND

                            ITS INHABITANT

                                  BY

                           HONORE DE BALZAC



                            Translated by

                          Henri Pene du Bois


                           Illustrated by

                          Francois Courboin




                           PREPARER'S NOTE

  This eBook was prepared from an edition published by Meyer
  Brothers and Company, New York, 1900.

  Of this edition 400 copies were printed.
  25 copies on Japan Paper, numbered 1 to 25.
  375 copies on specially made paper, numbered 26 to 400.



                               PREFACE

This little Parisian silhouette in prose was written by Balzac to be
the first chapter of a new series of the "Comedie Humaine" that he was
preparing while the first was finishing. Balzac was never tired. He
said that the men who were tired were those who rested and tried to
work afterwards.

"A Street of Paris and its Inhabitant" was in its author's mind when
Hetzel, engaged in collecting a copy for the work entitled "Le Diable
a Paris" that all book lovers admire, asked Balzac for an unpublished
manuscript.

Balzac gave him this, after retouching it, in order that it should
have the air of a finished story. Why Hetzel did not use it in "Le
Diable a Paris," no one knows. He went into exile, in Brussels, at the
military revolution that made Napoleon III Emperor and, needing money,
sold "A Street of Paris and its Inhabitant" with other manuscripts to
Le Siecle.

Balzac's work was printed entire in three pages of the journal Le
Siecle, in Paris, July 28, 1845. M. le Vicomte Spoelberch de Lovenjoul
owns Balzac's autograph manuscript of it. These details are given by
him and might be reproduced here with his signature. But the
publishers wish not to be deprived of the pleasure of paying homage to
the Vicomte Spoelberch de Lovenjoul.

He has made in the biography of Balzac, in editions of his books, in
the pious collection of his unpublished writings, the ideal literary
man's monument.

H. P. du B.



                                  I

                      PHYSIOGNOMY OF THE STREET

Paris has curved streets, streets that are serpentine. It counts,
perhaps, only the Rue Boudreau in the Chaussee d'Antin and the Rue
Duguay-Trouin near the Luxembourg as streets shaped exactly like a
T-square. The Rue Duguay-Trouin extends one of its two arms to the Rue
d'Assas and the other to the Rue de Fleurus.

In 1827 the Rue Duguay-Trouin was paved neither on one side nor on the
other; it was lighted neither at its angle nor at its ends. Perhaps it
is not, even to-day, paved or lighted. In truth, this street has so
few houses, or the houses are so modest, that one does not see them;
the city's forgetfulness of them is explained, then, by their little
importance.

Lack of solidity in the soil is a reason for that state of things. The
street is situated on a point of the Catacombs so dangerous that a
portion of the road disappeared recently, leaving an excavation to the
astonished eyes of the scarce inhabitants of that corner of Paris.

A great clamor arose in the newspapers about it. The government corked
up the "Fontis"--such is the name of that territorial bankruptcy--and
the gardens that border the street, destitute of passers-by, were
reassured the more easily because the tax list did not weigh on them.

The arm of the street that extends to the Rue de Fleurus is entirely
occupied, at the left, by a wall on the top of which shine broken
bottles and iron lances fixed in the plaster--a sort of warning to
hands of lovers and of thieves.

In this wall is a door, the famous little garden door, so necessary to
dramas and to novels, which is beginning to disappear from Paris.

This door, painted in dark green, having an invisible lock, and on
which the tax collector had not yet painted a number; this wall, along
which grow thistles and grass with beaded blades; this street, with
furrows made by the wheels of wagons; other walls gray and crowned
with foliage, are in harmony with the silence that reigns in the
Luxembourg, in the convent of the Carmelites, in the gardens of the
Rue de Fleurus.

If you went there, you would ask yourself, "Who can possibly live
here?"

Who? Wait and see.



                                  II

                     SILHOUETTE OF THE INHABITANT

One day, about three in the afternoon, that door was opened. Out of it
came a little old man, fat, provided with an abdomen heavy and
projecting which obliges him to make many sacrifices. He has to wear
trousers excessively wide, not to be troubled in walking. He has
renounced, long ago, the use of boots and trouser straps. He wears
shoes. His shoes were hardly polished.

The waistcoat, incessantly impelled to the upper part of the gastric
cavities by that great abdomen, and depressed by the weight of two
thoracic bumps that would make the happiness of a thin woman, offers
to the pleasantries of the passers-by a perfect resemblance to a
napkin rolled on the knees of a guest absorbed in discussion at
dessert.

The legs are thin, the arm is long, one of the hands is gloved only on
most solemn occasions and the other hand ignores absolutely the
advantage of a second skin.

That personage avoids the alms and the pity that his venerable green
frock coat invites, by wearing the red ribbon at his button-hole. This
proves the utility of the Order of the Legion of Honor which has been
contested too much in the past ten years, the new Knights of the Order
say.

The battered hat, in a constant state of horror in the places where a
reddish fuzz endures, would not be picked up by a rag picker, if the
little old man let it fall and left it at a street corner.

Too absent-minded to submit to the bother that the wearing of a wig
entails, that man of science--he is a man of science--shows, when he
makes a bow, a head that, viewed from the top, has the appearance of
the Farnese Hercules's knee.

Above each ear, tufts of twisted white hair shine in the sun like the
angry silken hairs of a boar at bay. The neck is athletic and
recommends itself to the notice of caricaturists by an infinity of
wrinkles, of furrows; by a dewlap faded but armed with darts in the
fashion of thistles.

The constant state of the beard explains at once why the necktie,
always crumpled and rolled by the gestures of a disquiet head, has its
own beard, infinitely softer than that of the good old man, and formed
of threads scratched from its unfortunate tissue.

Now, if you have divined the torso and the powerful back, you will
know the sweet tempered face, somewhat pale, the blue ecstatic eyes
and the inquisitive nose of that good old man, when you learn that, in
the morning, wearing a silk head kerchief and tightened in a dressing-
gown, the illustrious professor--he is a professor--resembled an old
woman so much that a young man who came from the depths of Saxony, of
Weimar, or of Prussia, expressly to see him, said to him, "Forgive me,
Madame!" and withdrew.

This silhouette of one of the most learned and most venerated members
of the Institute betrays so well enthusiasm for study and absent-
mindedness caused by application to the quest of truth, that you must
recognize in it the celebrated Professor Jean Nepomucene Apollodore
Marmus de Saint-Leu, one of the most admirable men of genius of our
time.



                                 III

                            MADAME ADOLPHE

When the old man--the professor counted then sixty-two summers--had
walked three steps, he turned his head at this question, hurled in an
acute tone by a voice that he recognized:

"Have you a handkerchief?"

A woman stood on the step of the garden door and was watching her
master with solicitude.

She seemed to be fifty years of age, and her dress indicated that she
was one of those servants who are invested with full authority in
household affairs.

She was darning stockings.

The man of science came back and said naively:

"Yes, Madame Adolphe, I have my handkerchief."

"Have you your spectacles?" she asked.

The man of science felt the side pocket of his waistcoat.

"I have them," he replied.

"Show them to me," she said. "Often you have only the case."

The professor took the case out of his pocket and showed the
spectacles with a triumphant air.

"You would do well to keep them on your nose," she said.

M. de Saint-Leu put on his spectacles, after rubbing the glasses with
his handkerchief.

Naturally, he thrust the handkerchief under his left arm while he set
his spectacles on his nose. Then he walked a few steps towards the Rue
de Fleurus and relaxed his hold on the handkerchief, which fell.

"I was sure of it," said Madame Adolphe to herself. She picked up the
handkerchief and cried:

"Monsieur! Monsieur!"

"Well!" exclaimed the professor, made indignant by her watchfulness.

"I beg your pardon," he said, receiving the handkerchief.

"Have you any money?" asked Madame Adolphe with maternal solicitude.

"I need none," he replied naively, explaining thus the lives of all
men of science.

"It depends," Madame Adolphe said. "If you go by way of the Pont des
Arts you need one sou."

"You are right," replied the man of science, as if he were retracing
instructions for a voyage to the North Pole. "I will go through the
Luxembourg, the Rue de Seine, the Pont des Arts, the Louvre, the Rue
du Coq, the Rue Croix-des-Petits-Champs, the Rue des Fosses-
Montmartre. It is the shortest route to the Faubourg Poissonniere."

"It is three o'clock," Madame Adolphe said. "Your sister-in-law dines
at six. You have three hours before you--Yes--you'll be there, but
you'll be late." She searched her apron pocket for two sous, which she
handed to the professor.

"Very well, then," she said to him. "Do not eat too much. You are not
a glutton, but you think of other things. You are frugal, but you eat
when you are absent-minded as if you had no bread at home. Take care
not to make Madame Vernet, your sister-in-law, wait. If you make her
wait, you will never be permitted again to go there alone, and it will
be shameful for you."

Madame Adolphe returned to the threshold of the little door and from
there watched her master. She had to cry to him, "To the right! To the
right!" for he was turning toward the Rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs.

"And yet he is a man of science, people say," she muttered to herself.
"How did he ever manage to get married? I'll ask Madame when I dress
her hair."



                                  IV

             INCONVENIENCE OF QUAYS WHERE ARE BOOK STALLS

At four o'clock, Professor Marmus was at the end of the Rue de Seine,
under the arcades of the Institute. Those who know him will admit that
he had done nobly, since he had taken only one hour to go through the
Luxembourg and down the Rue de Seine.

There a lamentable voice, the voice of a child, plucked from the good
man the two sous that Madame Adolphe had given to him. When he reached
the Pont des Arts he remembered that he had to pay toll and turned
back suddenly to beg for a sou from the child.

The little rascal had gone to break the coin, in order to give only
one sou to his mother. She was walking up and down the Rue Mazarine
with her baby at her breast.

It became necessary for the professor to turn his back on the veteran
soldier who guards against the possibility of a Parisian passing over
the bridge without paying the toll.

Two roads were open to him: the Pont Neuf and the Pont Royal.
Curiosity makes one lose more time in Paris than anywhere else.

How may one walk without looking at those little oblong boxes, wide as
the stones of the parapet, that all along the quays stimulate book
lovers with posters saying, "Four Sous--Six Sous--Ten Sous--Twelve
Sous--Thirty Sous?" These catacombs of glory have devoured many hours
that belonged to the poets, to the philosophers and to the men of
science of Paris.

Great is the number of ten-sous pieces spent in the four-sous stalls!

The professor saw a pamphlet by Vicq-d'Azyr, a complete Charles Bonnet
in the edition of Fauche Borel, and an essay on Malus.

"And such then is the sum of our achievements," he said to himself.
"Malus! A genius arrested in his course when he had almost captured
the empire of light! But we have had Fresnel. Fresnel has done
excellent things!--Oh, they will recognize some day that light is only
a mode of substance."

The professor held the notice on Malus. He turned its pages. He had
known Malus. He recalled to himself and recited the names of all the
Maluses. Then he returned to Malus, to his dear Malus, for they had
entered the Institute together at the return to Paris of the
expedition to Egypt. Ah! It was then the Institute of France and not a
mass of disunited Academies.

"The Emperor had preserved," said Marmus to himself, "the saintly idea
of the Convention. I remember," he muttered aloud, "what he said to me
when I was presented to him as a member of the Institute. Napoleon the
First said, 'Marmus, I am the Emperor of the French, but you are the
King of the infinitely little and you will organize them as I have
organized the Empire.' Ah, he was a very great man and a man of wit!
The French appreciated this too late."

The professor replaced Malus and the essay on him in the ten-sous
stall, without remarking how often hope had been lit and extinguished
alternately in the gray eyes of an old woman seated on a stool in an
angle of the quay.

"He was there," Marmus said, pointing to the Tuileries on the opposite
bank of the river. "I saw him reviewing his sublime troops! I saw him
thin, ardent as the sands of Egypt; but, as soon as he became Emperor,
he grew fat and good-natured, for all fat men are excellent--this is
why Sinard is thin, he is a gall-making machine. But would Napoleon
have supported my theory?"



                                  V

                             FIRST COURSE

It was the hour at which they went to the dinner table in the house of
Marmus's sister-in-law. The professor walked slowly toward the Chamber
of Deputies, asking himself if his theory might have had Napoleon's
support. He could no longer judge Napoleon save from that point of
view. Did Napoleon's genius coincide with that of Marmus in regard to
the assimilation of things engendered by an attraction perpetual and
continuous?



                                  VI

                            SECOND COURSE

"No, Baron Sinard was a worshipper of power. He would have gone to the
Emperor and told him that my theory was the inspiration of an atheist.
And Napoleon, who has done a great deal of religious sermonizing for
political reasons, would have persecuted me. He had no love for ideas.
He was a courtier of facts! Moreover, in Napoleon's time, it would not
have been possible for me to communicate freely with Germany. Would
they have lent me their aid--Wytheimler, Grosthuys, Scheele, Stamback,
Wagner?

"To make men of science agree--men of science agree!--the Emperor
should have made peace; in time of peace, perhaps, he would have taken
an interest in my quarrel with Sinard! Sinard, my friend, my pupil,
become my antagonist, my enemy! He, a man of genius--

"Yes, he is a man of genius. I do justice to him in the face of all
the world."

At this moment the professor could talk aloud without trouble to
himself or to the passers-by. He was near the Chamber of Deputies, the
session was closed, all Paris was at dinner--except the man of
science.

Marmus was haranguing the statues which, it must be conceded, are
similar to all audiences. In France there is not an audience that is
not prohibited from giving marks of approval or disapproval.
Otherwise, there is not an audience that would not turn orator.

At the Iena bridge Marmus had a pain in the stomach. He heard the
hoarse voice of a cab driver. Marmus thought that he was ill and let
himself be ushered into the cab. He made himself comfortable in it.

When the driver asked, "Where?" Marmus replied quietly:

"Home."

"Where is your home, Monsieur?" asked the driver.

"Number three," Marmus replied.

"What street?" asked the driver.

"Ah, you are right, my friend. But this is extraordinary," he said,
taking the driver into his confidence. "I have been so busy comparing
the hyoides and the caracoides--yes, that's it. I will catch Sinard in
the act. At the next session of the Institute he will have to yield to
evidence."

The driver wrapped his ragged cloak around him. Resignedly, he was
saying to himself, "I have seen many odd folks, but this one--" He
heard the word "Institute."

"The Institute, Monsieur?" he asked.

"Yes, my friend, the Institute," replied Marmus.

"Well he wears the red ribbon," said the driver to himself. "Perhaps
he has something to do with the Institute."

The professor, infinitely more comfortable in his cab than on the
sidewalk, devoted himself entirely to solving the problem that went
against his theory and would not surrender--the rascal! The cab stops
at the Institute; the janitor sees the Academician and bows to him
respectfully. The cab driver, his suspicions dispelled, talks with the
janitor of the Institute while the illustrious professor goes--at
eight in the evening--to the Academie des Sciences.

The cab driver tells the janitor where he found his fare.

"At the Iena bridge," repeats the janitor. "M. Marmus was coming back
from Passy. He had dined, doubtless, with M. Planchette, one of his
friends of the Academy."

"He couldn't tell me his address," says the cab driver.

"He lives in the Rue Duguay-Trouin, Number three," says the janitor.

"What a neighborhood!" exclaims the driver.

"My friend," asks of the janitor the professor who had found the door
shut, "is there no meeting of the Academy to-day?"

"To-day!" exclaims the janitor. "At this hour!"

"What is the time?" asks the man of science.

"About eight o'clock," the janitor replies.

"It is late," comments M. Marmus. "Take me home, driver."

The driver goes through the quays, the Rue du Bac, falls into a tangle
of wagons, returns by the Rue de Grenelle, the Croix-Rouge, the Rue
Cassette, then he makes a mistake. He tries to find the Rue d'Assas,
in the Rue Honore-Chevalier, in the Rue Madame, in all the impossible
streets and, swearing that if he had known he would not have come so
far for a hundred sous, disembarks the professor in the Rue Duguay-
Trouin.

The cab driver claims an hour, for the police ordinances, that defend
consumers of time in cabs from the stratagems of cab drivers, had not
yet posted the walls of Paris with their protecting articles that
settle in advance all difficulties.

"Very well, my friend," says M. Marmus to the cab driver. "Pay him,"
M. Marmus says to Madame Adolphe. "I do not feel well, my child."

"Monsieur, what did I tell you?" she exclaimed. "You have eaten too
much. While you were away, I said to myself, 'It is Mme. Vernet's
birthday. They will urge him at table and he will come back sick.'
Well, go to bed. I will make camomile tea for you."



                                 VII

                               DESSERT

The professor walked through the garden into a pavilion at one of its
corners, where he lived alone in order not to be disturbed by his
wife.

He went up the stairway leading to his little room, and complained so
much of his pains in the stomach that Madame Adolphe filled him with
camomile tea.

"Ah, here is a carriage! It is Madame returning in great anxiety, I am
sure," said Madame Adolphe, giving to the professor his sixth cup of
camomile tea. "Now, sir, I hope that you will be able to drink it
without me. Do not let it fall all over your bed. You know how Madame
would laugh. You are very happy to have a little wife who is so
amiable and so joyful."

"Say nothing to her, my child," exclaimed the professor, whose
features expressed a sort of childish fear.

The truly great man is always more or less a child.



                                 VIII

     THIS SHOWS THAT THE WIFE OF A MAN OF SCIENCE IS VERY UNHAPPY

"Well, good-bye. Return in the cab, it is paid for," Madame Marmus was
saying when Madame Adolphe arrived at the door.

The cab had already turned the corner. Madame Adolphe, not having seen
Madame Marmus's escort, said to herself:

"Poor Madame! He must be her nephew."

Madame Marmus, a little woman, lithe, graceful, mirthful, was divinely
dressed and in a fashion too young for her age, counting her twenty-
five years as a wife. Nevertheless, she wore well a gown with small
pink stripes, a cape embroidered and edged with lace, boots pretty as
the wings of a butterfly. She carried in her hand a pink hat with
peach flowers.

"You see, Madame Adolphe," she said, "my hair is all uncurled. I told
you that in this hot weather it should be dressed in bandeaux."

"Madame," the servant replied, "Monsieur is very sick. You let him eat
too much."

"What could I do?" Madame Marmus replied. "He was at one end of the
table and I at the other. He returned without me, as his habit is!
Poor little man! I will go to him as soon as I change my dress."

Madame Adolphe returns to the pavilion to propose an emetic, and
scolds the professor for not having returned with Madame Marmus.

"Since you wished to come in a cab, you might have spared me the
expense of the one that Madame Marmus took. The charge for your cab
was an hour. Did you stop anywhere?"

"At the Institute," he replied.

"At the Institute! Where did you take the cab?" she asked.

"In front of a bridge, I think," he replied.

"Was it still daylight?" she asked.

"Almost," he said.

"Then you did not go to Madame Vernet's!" exclaimed Madame Adolphe.

"Why did you not come to Madame Vernet's?" asked his wife.

Madame Marmus, having come to the door on the tips of her toes, had
heard Madame Adolphe's exclamation. She did not wish to see Madame
Adolphe's astonishment. Surely Madame Adolphe could not have forgotten
the assurance with which the professor's wife had placed him in
imagination at Madame Vernet's table.

"My dear child, I do not know," said the professor in a repentant
tone.

"Then you have not dined," said Madame Marmus, whose attitude remained
that of the purest innocence.

"With what could he have dined, Madame? He had two sous," said Madame
Adolphe, looking at Madame Marmus with an accusing air.

"Ah, I am truly to be pitied, my poor Madame Adolphe," said Madame
Marmus. "This sort of thing has been going on for twenty years, and I
am not yet accustomed to it. Six days after our wedding, we were going
out of our room one morning to take breakfast. M. Marmus hears the
drum of the Polytechnic School pupils of whom he was the professor. He
quits me to go and see them pass. I was nineteen years of age and when
I pouted, you cannot guess what he said to me. He said, 'These young
people are the flower and the glory of France!' This is how my
marriage began. You can judge of the rest."

"Oh, Monsieur, is it possible?" asked Madame Adolphe with an indignant
air.

"I have cornered Sinard!" exclaimed M. Marmus triumphantly.

"Oh, he would let himself die!" exclaimed Madame Adolphe.

"Get something for him to eat," said Madame Marmus. "He would let
himself do anything. Ah, my good Madame Adolphe, a man of science, you
see, is a man who knows nothing--of life."

The malady was cured by a cataplasm of Italian cheese that the man of
science ate without knowing what he was eating, for he held Sinard in
a corner--

"Poor Madame," said the kind Madame Adolphe. "I pity you. He was
really so absent-minded as that!"

And Madame Adolphe forgot the strange avowal of her mistress.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Street Of Paris And Its Inhabitant
by Honore De Balzac

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A STREET OF PARIS ***

This file should be named paris10.txt or paris10.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, paris11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, paris10a.txt

Produced by Dagny, John Bickers and David Widger

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

